1989 at Portland, Texas in the home of Jack Kumkel
concerning the Vietnam War. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge about the war, I'm going
to donate this tape to the Texas A&M Oral History
Collection in the University Archives. Is that
all right with you? Yes.
I'm going to ask you first about the biological
data, your date and place of birth. September 2nd,
1933 in Indiana, Pennsylvania. Okay. Education?
I have a bachelor's degree from the University of
Pittsburgh and a MBA from George Washington
University. Okay. Brief sketch of your military
career before Vietnam? Being a supply corps
officer, I was supply officer of the destroyer.
right out of college. And from there I ran a
commissary store in Greencoe Springs, Florida.
From there I was supply officer in a facility in
Antigua in the West Indies. From there I was Navy
exchange officer in Washington, D.C. And from
there I went to Vietnam. Your date and place of tour
in Vietnam? I got there right during the Tet
Offensive, which was in 1969,
and that was in February of 69, and I left in
February of 70. And where was that? I went into
consulate air base when I first went into Vietnam
and I was the supply officer of the Navy facility at
Cam Nong Bay. Your rank? I was lieutenant
commander. The type of service or job
description? I was the senior supply corps
officer for the Navy in 3 Corps. Vietnam was
divided into three areas, and I was the senior
supply corps
officer in 3 Corps during the time that I was there.
How you felt when you found out you were going to
Vietnam? I volunteered for Vietnam. Description
of the place you were first assigned to?
Initially, I went into Saigon, and this was during
the Tet Offensive. And I spent my first two weeks
there in indoctrination because the funding for
Cam Ranh Bay from out of Saigon. And prior to going
up there, I spent two weeks with a Captain Hine
there when he picked me up at the airport from Tan
Samu. And I remember going in to Saigon from Tan
Samu to the air base where he even, he broke out his
.45 and laid it on the window as we were going
through some areas of South Vietnam. And the whole
two weeks that I was in Saigon, every night the sky
was lit up, the bed shook all day and all night from
the bombing around Saigon. So it was a rather
interesting period and one of a lot of activities
at the time. And how much contact did you have with
the Vietnamese people, and how did they react to
you? Oh, I loved the Vietnamese people. They were
real kind. They didn't have a formal education,
but they had good common sense. And I think the more
education you get, the more you appreciate people
with common sense. They were extremely good this
way. I was able to get my own interpreter, and it was
rather unique. I don't drink at all. And when I went
into the officer's club, I always had Cokes. And a
sister of the bartender in there, her name was
Soon, and she was a 16-year-old girl. And she
learned to speak English from being in the
officer's club there. And a little later, I picked
her up at 25 cents an hour to work in the supply
department. And since she was able to speak
Vietnamese and English, I soon started taking her
on my trips around Vietnam because she was my
interpreter there. And I had my own jeep, and being
a senior supply corps officer, I was responsible
for paying all the people in the three-quarter
area of Vietnam. So I did get out into the
communities. And I particularly noticed in each
one of the communities that the new areas were all
schools. And the new buildings were schools. The
Vietnamese were finally educating the
Buddhists. When the French was there, the French
only educated the Catholics. And the Catholics
make up about 10% of Vietnam, the Buddhists about
90%. So as a result, with these new schools and with
Vietnamese teachers, the people finally felt
they were now getting something from the
government. And they were supporting the
government in Saigon because now their children
were getting an education where they didn't have
that opportunity. Before you came to Vietnam, how
much did you know about their educational
origins? Were you trained or did you have any
education? No, I was supposed to go to a SEER
school, a survival school, prior to that, prior to
going over there. But they cut that short because
of Lieutenant Prince and some of the other people.
But as far as knowledge of Vietnam, prior to that, I
had very
little knowledge. Do you have your opinion on the
U.S. strategy? Well, I think it was strictly
political. Had we wanted to win it, we could have
very easily won it. Politics was such a heavy
factor in it that we weren't allowed to do what we
wanted, and the Vietnamese weren't allowed to do
what they wanted. Now, to give you an example, I was
very close with one of the Vietnamese colonels
there. And he said that he would like to see the
Americans go primarily so that they could walk
above the 17th parallel, give the North
Vietnamese a dose of their own medicine. Because
the North Vietnamese were allowed to come down and
sabotage and snipe in South Vietnam, but the
Americans didn't allow the South Vietnamese to go
up north and do the same thing. The Vietnamese
would have preferred that the Americans leave
because all the Vietnamese girls were changing
their habits. They were becoming Americanized.
And they were running around with American men.
And they wanted their girls back to the Vietnamese
men. And the reason they were with American men is
because the American men had the money. And
actually, the girls wanted the entertainment
that was associated with the money that the
Americans could provide them with. How did you
feel about the conventional war method versus the
guerrilla war method? Did you feel that we had, we
were conventional, had conventional lines and
went into a guerrilla warfare type of situation?
Well, we weren't really in a guerrilla warfare
there. They were. Now, we could have been very
successful in the guerrilla war against the North
Vietnamese had we allowed the Vietnamese to go
north. And I might add, even when we bombed in North
Vietnam, we could only hit certain targets. I was
with a Navy pilot that turned in his wings after 92
missions, and he says, I refuse to go anymore
because we're not allowed to hit the targets we see
down there. He says, we can only hit the bridges.
And what happens is that... They know exactly
where we're coming. They know exactly what our
targets are, and they just lay up all kind of flak to
the planes coming in. Also, the Vietnamese would
put all of their convoys in residential areas.
They stored all of their oil around the schools or
in the churches. I oil around the schools. They put
their anti-aircraft guns around the churches so
that if we did knock them out, we'd either be
hitting their schools or we'd be hitting their
churches, which is the propaganda-type war that
they're using against us. Did you have any actual
training or experiences in combat? Oh, not
really. The first evening that I got into Cam Ranh
Bay, they shot a few mortars over at us. What
time of the day was most active for you? Well, being
a Supply Corps officer, we had normal hours
primarily. We, of course, had our perimeter
watches, and we had to do these entries and so on,
and watched our perimeter. But at Cameron Bay, we
were particularly fortunate in that the mainland
between our base and Vietnam itself was patrolled
by the South Koreans. And the South Koreans were
very dedicated to the task they were doing, and the
Vietnamese didn't want to tangle with them. They
would rather come up against the Americans
because the Americans would ask questions and
usually not shoot, or the Koreans would usually
shoot first if someone got into their area.
Comment on the quality of Arvin, South
Vietnamese, and the enemy as fighters? Yes, I
think they were decent fighters. This is contrary
to the news media that we constantly heard. I was
with a Navy captain that was on the base where I was.
He was also in the Korean War. And at the time I was
there, which was 1970, 69 and 70, he said that the
Vietnamese were far ahead of where the Koreans
were at the same time. So that he felt, as far as
pacification was concerned, that the Vietnamese
were far ahead of the Koreans and were making more
progress, and had made progress quicker in 1970.
Do you have your views on Selective Service? I
would be in favor of Selective Service. Mainly
because I think our young people need to know what
goes on in other countries. I think that even if
it's a six month tour, I think it would be wise to do
this. I think the conception of the military is far
different than what it actually
is.
Prior to going into the military, I always thought
someone who made a career out of the military was a
person who couldn't get a job elsewhere. That was
the way I felt about it. And, of course, once I got
in, I liked the challenges and learned about the
travel and the competition with my peer groups as
being the same age as I am. Okay, your views on the
National Guard? I don't have contact with the
National Guard. I don't think I'm given any
intelligence. Am I correct in saying that the
National Guard did not play any part in Vietnam? I
didn't have any contact with them. Who did you
receive your orders from, or where did they
originate? My boss was in Saigon, Captain Hine,
and he handled the funding for the base. So that was
about my immediate superior. Now, he was a
commanding officer of the base, also in the
workforce, but as
far as funding and so forth, he was not in Saigon.
What was your opinion about careerism? in the
military during Vietnam and did it since? I was a
career Navy man. And like I said, I volunteered. I
was a lieutenant commander when I went over and
made commander shortly after I went back. I was
already career. I believed in what we were doing. I
still believe in what we were doing over there. I
think the U.S. Congress did the Vietnamese people
a terrible injustice. I think our news media was
terribly slanted that portrayed a situation that
was totally out of context. When I first come back
and I would hear the newscasters talking about
areas that I've been in, I'd just jump out of my
chair. They were lying. And then how our news media
got this information or how it was posted, I really
don't know. But it was a terrible injustice to me
and these people and the contacts that I had with
them. What about the, like, when they switched...
people in command so often. In Vietnam? Yeah, they
rotated them every year.
Well, you could go back the second time. You could
go back again. When you're away from your family a
year, this can be detrimental to home life. I don't
know that I would want to send our men over there
longer than a year at a time and still be married
because that's a terribly long time for children
to
be without a father and so on. Okay. Could you
comment on problems in Vietnam such as drugs? The
drugs were there. I never had any problem in my
department. I handled quarters myself, and I was
very emphatic that anyone in my department that
was involved in drugs, that I wanted other members
of my department to straighten them out. And I told
them I didn't want them to come to me with it, I
wanted them to get it corrected because they were
out in the perimeters protecting us when we were
sleeping, And many of them had been involved in
drugs, and we couldn't sleep at night. And I
expected each of my people to straighten out
anyone that would get involved in drugs. And as a
result, and the whole time I was there, I didn't
have one single drug problem in my life. OK. How
about you? No, we all took our pills while we were
over there, took the malaria. I remember
one time the medical doctor came by my room and he
says, why don't you take your salt tablets? And I
said, well, how do you
know, doc? And he said, well,
look at your mouth. And I had cold blisters on my
mouth. It was hot over there, very humid, and we
perspired a lot. So as a result, we had to take salt
taverns and lack of salt when I would get cold
sores. That was the only effect that I ever had. We
took our malaria pills off. We never had any
trouble on our base with that. Did you respect your
leaders? Oh, absolutely. We had good people. Not
only this, I had the best men in Vietnam that I've
had in the areas that I've worked in, the
department I've run. Mainly because they would
send me a lot of college graduates in enlisted
ranks. And
I just got excellent people. Plus, In the supply
department, there's a lot of Filipinos that work
in that area, and they were close to home, and they
would have a chance about every two months to get a
flight to the Philippines for a week. So as a
result, I had top notch Philippine enlisted men
that ran the messes for me, that is the officer's
clubs, the enlisted messes, the barber shop, also
the retail store. And I even had some in my regular
supply department operations so that I just had
top-notch people. So I didn't find, I found that I
had the best people over there. And my department
was run the best that I had run at any time in my
career. My Kardex system, which is what we use over
there, said in my warehouse there was going to be
three in a certain location. I had three in a
certain location. I also had Vietnamese
employees that worked with us, but they were real
fine people and did an excellent job. And the
Russians are running over there now. They got that
base, and they got a fine running operation. Do you
feel you were justified in going over there in the
first place, and why? Well, I think that will
probably be debated over the years. I supported my
government in doing this. I felt they had a bigger
picture than what I had of it. And
the communists were trying to take over that
country by force. And the Vietnamese people did
not want the communists there. We had set up the
road system so that each of the handlers, they had
reasonably good roads built by the U.S. military.
We set up the communication system from
telephones to television where they were getting
word out of Saigon as to what was happening from
time to time. Everything was set up in a
communication manner Initially, there was a big
language barrier, but there were enough Lebanese
that also spoke English by the time I was there that
communications even verbally were excellent.
No, I
thought they cooperated real well. I didn't see a
problem with this. The Koreans were probably the
best fighters over there, though. Do you feel that
the South Vietnamese had a real desire to fight.
Yes, they did. And they did because they wanted
self-determination. They wanted to be, they saw
their government getting their kids an
education. And then Even in the Delta, in the
Mekong Delta, by the time I was there, it was in that
period, 69 to 70, they were producing enough rice
in the Delta, it was pacified enough that they
could even export rice. So they were getting their
system back in order. And I still am angry at the
U.S. Congress and what they did to these people. Do
you think we could have won the war? Absolutely. By
continuing to, when we pulled our troops out, just
providing them with military supplies, there's
no question in my mind that we would have won. The
stampede came out of the central part up in the
last, which is a college area.
The stampede started up in that area. as a result of
the U.S. Congress cutting off aid, total aid to
Vietnam. Not only had the U.S. Congress and the
President, President Nixon at the time, they said
he'd take all the people out, but he promised them
to give them military aid so that they could
continue to fight for their own
self-determination. But then, after the bulk of
our people were taken out, the U.S. Congress cut
off the money. As far as aid or supplies, when they
did this, this caused the panic, and that panic
just overran. It was taken over by panic more than
anything else. And it was totally unnecessary,
unjustified, and a black date, as far as I'm
concerned, in American history. So if you could
put the blank on something. It was Congress. No
doubt about it. U.S. Congress and the liberal news
media. What was it like when you came home? How did
people react to you when you told them you wanted to
come home? Well, I never had a problem. I read about
people looking down on you in Vietnam. I had a
sister-in-law that my mother threw out of her
house because she was having a fit that I was going
to Vietnam.
And that's probably as close as anyone would be
making any comments. My feeling coming back, I
didn't see anything adverse. I wasn't looking for
anything, any hero's welcome or anything like
that. I was doing my job as far as I was concerned. I
was doing what I felt was right for my country, and I
still feel that. So your views haven't changed
since the war? No, I'm not. In fact, it angers me
more that I see the way the U.S. Congress got away
with doing that, and the news media support him,
and even Walter Cronkite is coming out with his CBS
capsule reports on Vietnam still supporting the
lies that were perpetrated on American people at
that time. And it's wrong. Did you have a question
while you were in Portland? No. I volunteered and
they're fine people. I wish I could have helped
them more. To give you an example,
one time I was downtown in my Jeep and since I was a
lieutenant commander at the time, that's
equivalent to a major. And some young fellow was
yelling at me. He says, Major, Major. He says, come
here. He says, my parents work for you. See, I
didn't know that. And he says, come. He says, I want
you to see my home. So I got out of my Jeep and I went
over to his home. And it was an area, oh, I would say
maybe 12 feet square. This is where the home where
There were the mother and three children. And
there was bare walls and
the walls were about 12 inches off from the ground
so that they had ventilation into the house. And
they had sheets of plywood leaning up against the
wall that they laid on the floor with what they
slept on at night. And on the one wall was a
crucifix. They were a Catholic family. But they
had a black lacquer painting that they had brought
from North Vietnam. They had been Catholic
refugees from North Vietnam. And he told me that
the reason he could speak English, he was going to
the University of the Latin, and he was studying to
be a priest.
When I got back to my quarters, I went over to the
Catholic chaplain and I told him about this boy and
I said, surely there ought to be some Catholic
charities. And because his dad was making 50 cents
an hour working for me as a carpenter. I said,
surely there ought to be a Catholic charity that
could pick up this boy's education so
that the family making such a meager wage wouldn't
have to be going through all these costs. So I took
the Catholic chaplain over to the family, and sure
enough, the Catholic charity did pick up his costs
up until the time that I left the economy. Whenever
I left Vietnam, on my desk, the day I left, was this
particular picture. And this, it was the only
thing they had. And on it was a note. It says that
Commander, no, Major, it says, Major, no matter
where you are, there will always be someone in
Vietnam to watch you.
In
general, tell me how the American soldiers felt
about Vietnam all through the war up until the
fallout. Well, one of the difficulties were that a
lot of them were draftees that went over there. So,
being draftees and maybe not being career type
persons Their attitudes were a lot different for
serving in the military, let alone going to
Vietnam where the press was certainly not based in
the government continuum. So there were a lot of
boys that were over there that didn't want to be
there, and fighting an unpopular war at home.
There was a lot of resentment. We lost,
particularly in the Navy and Marines, we lost a lot
of young officers who were being dragged. By that I
mean that they were shot in the back by their own men
or they were injured. So we lost some good officers
this way. because of the caliber of people that
particularly Marines and the Army say over there.
For one, the Marines should have never been
involved. That's the Army's job, not the Marines.
And they pulled the Marines in there. And this hurt
the Marine Corps for many years because of these
draftees that got in there at this one o'clock in
the morning or where they really wanted to be. So
the attitude of the Navy was entirely
different.
We didn't
draft people to put them in Vietnam. I had good men.
My men were solid. They were good citizens. They
re-upped. What I mean is they decided they wanted
to stay there and continue their two-year tour or
stay there longer. Because every six months over
there, if they would stay or request staying, they
would get a 30-day rotation
period where they would go to Hong Kong or to
Singapore or the Philippines or Tokyo and so on for
30 days. Is that for everyone? Yes, for the
enlisted personnel. So every six months they
would be given this. So this was pretty nice, plus
they were able to save everything that was made.
They were making all the money. And they were
making extra money because
they
were using it for something. Why did we pull out ? Of
course, because of the politics at home,
President Nixon said that he or phase
the people out, which he did. And I think it was
proper. I think it was done. I think the
pacification had been completed. I think it was
time for the Vietnamese to go ahead and start
making their own decisions and get the Americans
out of that because I think they were trained well
enough and they can handle it. I think it was
proper. What was wrong was when Congress
cut
off the money. The Vietnamese could have handled
it. They would have handled it. And I think it's
unforgivable if the U.S. Congress didn't do that.
What was your view
on Antifa? Do they have every right to do it? I feel I
was over there for the right for those people to do
that. I did not agree with them as far as their
protest is concerned, but I will continue to fight
for their right to protest. I think that this is
important. Any time I'm ever angry at my
government and want to protest, I want to be able to
do it. Well, you see, What was happening, when I
come back, I wanted to get out and speak. I wanted to
do it. And I was told very emphatically my job was to
carry out foreign policy, not to make it. When
you're in the military, you carry out what the
politicians, the mistakes the politicians make.
You go over there and leave for their mistakes.
Yeah, you might guess that I vote politicians in
pretty low speed. Because whenever they, when
they're not successful, then they'll use the
military to do their dirty work. But,
yeah, I will die for my country. I've always said
that. I believe in the United States. I love my
country. But I'll also fight for the right for
those people to demonstrate against me when I'm
wrong, or whenever they think that I'm wrong. I
think this is the great thing about a democracy,
and I think everyone should have the right to
demonstrate, and if the government makes a
mistake, then they should have to face the gravity
of it. Oh
yeah, I don't, I won't think about it. It makes me
very angry. What you do is that you have to think
positive thoughts. And that's what I do. So, no, I
don't think positive thoughts. I refuse to think
positive thoughts. Okay. And this
last question. If you had a message to the college
students today, try and clear up some
misconceptions about Vietnam, what would it be?
Hmm.
I would suppose that I realize that the news media
is involved in headlines, sensationalism,
trying to get people to buy their publication. And
not necessarily are they always interesting to
me. And you're going to have to go beyond. You
really need to talk to the people to find out if the
truth really is there. Many times, the truth is
bland, and it doesn't get published. Or if it is, it
gets on the fifth or
sixth page after the sensationalists and the
Republicans. So I would think for young people
today is that, be very cautious with the freedom of
the press. It's something we have to fight to
protect. But also, with that freedom, they can do a
lot of things that just
aren't natural. I appreciate that.